---
layout: post
title:  Collatz Conjecture
category: CodeSnippets
---

I find it interesting how how the language I write code in
shapes the solution I gravitate towards.
The other day I realized that I had solved the same problem
`Collatz Conjecture` from exercism.io in three different languages.

From exercism the assignment text is as follows:

> The Collatz Conjecture or 3x+1 problem can be summarized as follows:
> Take any positive integer n. If n is even, divide n by 2 to get n / 2. If n is odd,
> multiply n by 3 and add 1 to get 3n + 1. Repeat the process indefinitely.
> The conjecture states that no matter which number you start with, you will always reach 1 eventually.
> Given a number n, return the number of steps required to reach 1.

### Haskell

In haskell guards `|` are readily available and it is very easy to create
recursive functions using guards with base cases. My solution ended up like this:

```haskell
collatz :: Integer -> Maybe Integer
collatz n | n <= 0    = Nothing
          | n == 1    = Just 0
          | even n    = fmap (+1) $ collatz $ div n 2
          | otherwise = fmap (+1) $ collatz $ n * 3 + 1
```

### Clojure

With clojure having iterators in the root namespace they are always at the forefront
of my mind when coding clojure. its easy to create a pattern with where we have an infinite
sequence of next-collatz that we take form until we reach our predicate:

```clojure
(defn next-collatz
  [n]
  (if (even? n)
    (/ n 2)
    (+ 1 (* 3 n))))

(defn collatz [n]
  (->> (iterate next-collatz n)
       (take-while #(not= % 1))
```


### Scala

I write scala in my day job currently. Normally I would not think to
use iterators for this so perhaps this is a bad example in the context
of this post.

When writing this in Scala I was colored by remembering how I solved
this in Clojure. I am however happy with how it ended up and I think
I will try to reach for iterators more often in Scala also.


```scala
private def isEven(i: Int): Boolean = i % 2 == 0
private def nextCollatz(n: Int): Int =
  if (isEven(n)) n / 2
  else n * 3 + 1

// The solution in exercism requires that you use `Option`
def steps(n: Int): Option[Int] =
   Option(n)
     .filter(_ > 0)
     .map(Iterator.iterate(_)(nextCollatz).indexWhere(_ == 1))
```
